MIGUEL HERNAN: Why do we like causal graphs?
After all, we have seen that causal graphs are simple pictures, that even
a five year old can understand.
How can they be so helpful to people conducting research?
Well, causal DAGs are helpful because they are two things at the same time.
On the one hand, they're causal models.
They are qualitative causal models, but causal models.
On the other hand, they are statistical models.
That is, they're models that represent associations and independencies
between variables.
That means that we can draw a causal graph using our expert
knowledge, our causal knowledge, and at the same time,
we are building a statistical model without knowing it.
And this dual nature is based on the fact
that the causal effects imply associations.
And lack of causal effects imply independencies.
And this is very important, because when we are conducting research
we find biases.
And these biases are associations.
Therefore, we can use causal graphs to conceptualize those biases
and to identify them in our research.
OK, this may have sounded pretty abstract.
There is a mathematical theory underlying causal graphs,
but we don't need to master that theory in order to use causal graphs.
It's kind of like you don't need to know how a car works in order to ride it.
Later in this lesson we'll talk more about theory,
but for now we are going to see how causal graphs work with examples,
with informal examples.
Let us consider the simplest possible causal DAG with two variables, A arrow
Y.
A is a variable that represent cigarette smoking and can take two values.
One, if the person is a smoker, zero if a person is not.
Y is a variable that represents lung cancer and can also take two values.
One if the person develops lung cancer, and zero if the person doesn't.
So we say that A and Y are binary variables or dichotomous variables.
We draw this causal graph because we believe
that there is a causal effect of smoking, A, on cancer Y.
And to do that, we use our expert knowledge.
We didn't use any data.
But what if we had data?
Well, if we had data, then we could compute the association between A
and Y. So if A has a causal effect on Y, as represented by our graph, A arrow Y,
do we expect to find an association between A and Y in our data?
To answer this question, suppose that we have a database
with millions of people.
And for each person we know whether they were cigarette smokers, A,
and whether they develop lung cancer, Y.
What does an association between smoking, A, and cancer, Y, mean?
If we go back to our definition of association,
we said that smoking and lung cancer are associated
if the proportion of individuals with cancer
is different among smokers and nonsmokers.
But this is precisely what we expect to happen if smoking causes cancer.
We expect A and Y to be associated when A has a causal effect on Y.
And we expect A and Y to be independent when A does not have an effect.
We can think about association in an equivalent way.
We say that A and Y are associated when having information about A
allows us to predict Y better on average.
And that is precisely what happens in our example.
If we learn that someone is a cigarette smoker,
then we will predict she has a risk of lung cancer
that is greater than the average risk of cancer in the population.
And that's what I meant when I said that DAGs
are both causal and statistical models.
Because if we use our expert knowledge to draw a causal graph,
with no arrow from A to Y, then we are also
drawing a statistical model that says that A and Y are independent,
that they are not associated.
And more generally, graph theory gives us a rule.
We can only exclude an association between A and Y
if there is no arrow from A to Y. Informally,
we can see the arrow between A and Y as a pipe.
A pipe that carries association right on water.
If the arrow is there, then a flow of association between A and Y
is expected.
Let's now consider another question.
When we drew our graph, A arrow Y, we didn't
include any variables between A and Y. But the effect
of smoking A on lung cancer Y is obviously mediated by some variables.
For example, by the damage to the DNA of the cells of the lung
that smoking causes.
So we could then have drawn a causal graph, A arrow B arrow
Y, where B is cell damage.
And B, we say is a mediator of the effect of A on Y.
But we didn't do it.
We didn't include B on our graph.
And that's because causal graphs do not need to include mediators
when the goal is to estimate the total effect of A
on Y. If we needed information on mediators to estimate causal effects,
then it will be impossible to estimate most causal effects.
Not even using randomized experiments, because we typically
don't have any information on mediators in randomized experiments.
OK, but let's say that we decide to include the mediator B, cell damage,
into our graph.
This is the graph that we would draw if we believed
that there is an effect of A on B, that there is an effect of B on Y,
and that there is no direct effect of A on Y
through pathways other than the A B Y pathway.
Again, this level of detail in the specification of the graph
is unnecessary when we are interested in the total effect of A on Y.
But let's say that we have a graph with B. In this case,
we can ask a new type of question.
We can ask a question about conditional independence.
We can ask the question, are A and Y associated conditional
on B or within levels of B?
Is there an association between A and Y, among individuals
with a particular value of B?
And to answer this question, we will need data on A, Y and of course,
B. So suppose again that we have a database with millions of people
and for each person we know whether they were cigarette smokers,
whether they had cell damage, and whether they developed lung cancer.
And let me make a clarification here.
The arrows of causal graphs are not meant to be deterministic.
That means that when we have an arrow from cigarette smoking A to cell damage
B, that doesn't mean that for every single smoker
we're going to see cell damage.
Because some smokers may never develop cell damage;
some nonsmokers may develop cell damage for other reasons.
OK, so with this data on A, Y and B, we can answer the question
on whether A and Y are associated conditional on B.
For example, we can restrict our analysis
to a subset of individuals with cell damage with B equals one.
And to represent it graphically that we are conditioning
on a particular value of B, one, we put a square box around B on the graph.
And now we can check in the subset of the population with cell damage B
equals one whether there is an association between A and Y.
We just check whether the proportion of individuals with lung cancer
is different among smokers and nonsmokers.
If the proportions are different, we will
say that there is an association between A and Y conditional on B equals one.
Or another way to say this, we will check
whether A contains information not already included in B
that allows us to predict Y better.
If the correct DAG is really A arrow B arrow Y,
do we expect to find an association between A, cigarette smoking and Y,
lung cancer, among people with B equals one with cell damage?
Well, according to this graph, the effect of smoking
is entirely mediated through cell damage.
Therefore, if someone has cell damage, then learning
that she's a smoker does not provide any additional information with respect
to the risk of Y. You can think of it in this way.
If we know that someone with cell damage has a 10% chance of developing cancer,
and then we learn that she is a cigarette smoker,
that doesn't change the number.
She still has a 10% chance of developing cancer.
Because under our graph, smoking can only
affect cancer risk through cell damage.
And similarly, if we know that someone without cell damage
has a 1% chance of developing cancer, then
learning that she is a cigarette smoker does not change that number.
She still has a 1% chance of cancer.
We say that there's no conditional association between A and Y
with the levels of B. And that's true for all levels of B,
whether we are conditioning on B equals one, cell damage, or B equals
zero, no cell damage.
And this is another example of why DAGs are both causal and statistical models.
We use our expert knowledge to draw a causal graph
with no direct arrows from A to Y. And that implies a statistical model
that says A and Y are independent conditional on B.
That they are not associated with the levels of B.
More generally, there's a rule in graph theory.
The flow of association between A and Y is
interrupted when we condition on the mediator, B. The box around B
blocks the association between A and Y.
So if there is no direct arrow from A to Y,
we say that there is no association between A and Y
conditioned on B, even though A has a causal effect on Y.
OK, it's time to discuss another causal structure.